Arthur Schopenhauer (/ˈʃoʊpənhaʊər/ SHOH-pən-how-ər;[9] German: [ˈaʁtuːɐ̯ ˈʃoːpn̩haʊɐ] ⓘ; 22 February 1788 – 21 September 1860) was a German philosopher. He is known for his 1818 work The World as Will and Representation (expanded in 1844), which characterizes the phenomenal world as the manifestation of a blind and irrational noumenal will.[10][11][12] Building on the transcendental idealism of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), Schopenhauer developed an atheistic metaphysical and ethical system that rejected the contemporaneous ideas of German idealism.[7][8]

Schopenhauer was among the first thinkers in Western philosophy to share and affirm significant tenets of Indian philosophy, such as asceticism, denial of the self, and the notion of the world-as-appearance.[13] His work has been described as an exemplary manifestation of philosophical pessimism.[14] Though his work failed to garner substantial attention during his lifetime, he had a posthumous impact across various disciplines, including philosophy, literature, and science. His writing on aesthetics, morality, and psychology have influenced many thinkers and artists.
Life
Family

Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal grandfather, Andreas Schopenhauer [de] (1720–1793), was a wealthy merchant in Danzig. Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal grandmother, Anna Renata Schopenhauer (1726–1804), was the daughter of a Dutch merchant and the Dutch ambassador to the Hanseatic city of Danzig Hendrik Soermans (1700–1775). Arthur Schopenhauer's maternal grandfather, Christian Heinrich Trosiener [de] (1730–1797) was a merchant in Danzig and a councilor from the middle class. Arthur Schopenhauer's maternal grandmother, Elizabeth Trosiener (1745–1818), was daughter of pharmacist Georg Lehmann (died 1762) and his wife Susanna Concordia Lehmann, née Neumann (born 1718). Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal great-grandfather, Johann Schopenhauer [de] (1670–after 1724), was the mentioned merchant in Gdansk. Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal great-grandfather through paternal grandmother, Hendrik Soermans [de] (1700–1775), was a Dutch merchant, Ambassador of the Netherlands in Gdansk, son of pastor Johannes Soermans (1670–1754) and grandson of Martinus Soermans (1638–1705). Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal great-greatgrandfather, Johann Schopenhauer (1630–1701), was farmer in Petershagen and son of Simon Schopenhauer (1580–1660) and grandson of Salomon Schopenhauer (born 1550). Arthur Schopenhauer's paternal great-grandmother, Marie Elizabeth Schopenhauer, nee Lessig, was a daughter of merchant Andreas Lessig (1658–1713).[citation needed]
Early life
Schopenhauer's birthplace house, ul. Św. Ducha

Arthur Schopenhauer was born on 22 February 1788, in Gdańsk (then part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth; later in the Kingdom of Prussia Danzig) on Św. Ducha 47 (in Prussia Heiliggeistgasse), the son of Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer [de] (1747–1805) and his wife Johanna Schopenhauer (née Trosiener; 1766–1838),[15] both descendants of wealthy German patrician families. While they came from a Protestant background, neither of them was very religious;[16]: 79 [17] both supported the French Revolution,[16]: 13  were republicans, cosmopolitans and Anglophiles.[16]: 9  When Gdańsk became part of Prussia in 1793, Heinrich moved to Hamburg—a free city with a republican constitution. His firm continued trading in Danzig where most of their extended families remained. Adele, Arthur's only sibling, was born on 12 July 1797.[citation needed]

In 1797, Arthur was sent to Le Havre to live with the family of his father's business associate, Grégoire de Blésimaire. He seemed to enjoy his two-year stay there, learning to speak French and fostering a life-long friendship with Jean Anthime Grégoire de Blésimaire.[16]: 18  As early as 1799, Arthur started playing the flute.[16]: 30 

In 1803, he accompanied his parents on a European tour of Holland, Britain, France, Switzerland, Austria and Prussia. Viewed as primarily a pleasure tour, Heinrich used the opportunity to visit some of his business associates abroad.[citation needed]

Heinrich presented Arthur with a choice: he could either stay at home to begin preparations for university or travel with them to further his merchant education. Arthur chose to travel with them. He deeply regretted his choice later because the merchant training was very tedious. He spent twelve weeks of the tour attending school in Wimbledon, where he was confused by strict and intellectual Anglicans who he'd described as shallow. He continued to sharply criticize Anglican religiosity later in life despite his general Anglophilia.[16]: 56  He was also under pressure from his father, who became very critical of his educational results.[citation needed]

In 1805, Heinrich drowned in a canal near their home in Hamburg. Although it was possible that his death was accidental, his wife and son believed that it was suicide. He was prone to anxiety and depression, each becoming more pronounced later in his life.[18] Heinrich had become so fussy, even his wife started to doubt his mental health.[16]: 43  "There was, in the father's life, some dark and vague source of fear which later made him hurl himself to his death from the attic of his house in Hamburg."[16]: 88 

Arthur showed similar moodiness during his youth and often acknowledged that he inherited it from his father. There were other instances of serious mental health problems on his father's side of the family.[16]: 4  Despite his hardship, Schopenhauer liked his father and later referred to him in a positive light.[16]: 90  Heinrich Schopenhauer left the family with a significant inheritance that was split in three among Johanna and the children. Arthur Schopenhauer was entitled to control of his part when he reached the age of majority. He invested it conservatively in government bonds and earned annual interest that was more than double the salary of a university professor.[16]: 136  After quitting his merchant apprenticeship, with some encouragement from his mother, he dedicated himself to studies at the Ernestine Gymnasium, Gotha, in Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg. While there, he also enjoyed social life among the local nobility, spending large amounts of money, which deeply concerned his frugal mother.[16]: 128  He left the Gymnasium after writing a satirical poem about one of the schoolmasters. Although Arthur claimed that he left voluntarily, his mother's letter indicates that he may have been expelled.[16]: 129 
Schopenhauer in his youth

Arthur spent two years as a merchant in honor of his dead father. During this time, he had doubts about being able to start a new life as a scholar.[16]: 120  Most of his prior education was as a practical merchant and he had trouble learning Latin; a prerequisite for an academic career.[16]: 117 

His mother moved away, with her daughter Adele, to Weimar—then the centre of German literature—to enjoy social life among writers and artists. Arthur and his mother did not part on good terms. In one letter, she wrote: "You are unbearable and burdensome, and very hard to live with; all your good qualities are overshadowed by your conceit, and made useless to the world simply because you cannot restrain your propensity to pick holes in other people."[19] His mother, Johanna, was generally described as vivacious and sociable.[16]: 9  She died 24 years later. Some of Arthur's negative opinions about women may be rooted in his troubled relationship with his mother.[20]

Arthur moved to Hamburg to live with his friend Jean Anthime, who was also studying to become a merchant.
Education
He moved to Weimar but did not live with his mother, who even tried to discourage him from coming by explaining that they would not get along very well.[16]: 131  Their relationship deteriorated even further due to their temperamental differences. He accused his mother of being financially irresponsible, flirtatious and seeking to remarry, which he considered an insult to his father's memory.[16]: 116,131  His mother, while professing her love to him, criticized him sharply for being moody, tactless, and argumentative, and urged him to improve his behavior so that he would not alienate people.[16]: 129  Arthur concentrated on his studies, which were now going very well, and he also enjoyed the usual social life such as balls, parties and theater. By that time Johanna's famous salon was well established among local intellectuals and dignitaries, the most celebrated of them being Goethe. Arthur attended her parties, usually when he knew that Goethe would be there—although the famous writer and statesman seemed not even to notice the young and unknown student. It is possible that Goethe kept a distance because Johanna warned him about her son's depressive and combative nature, or because Goethe was then on bad terms with Arthur's language instructor and roommate, Franz Passow.[16]: 134  Schopenhauer was also captivated by the beautiful Karoline Jagemann, mistress of Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, and he wrote to her his only known love poem.[16]: 135  Despite his later celebration of asceticism and negative views of sexuality, Schopenhauer occasionally had sexual affairs—usually with women of lower social status, such as servants, actresses, and sometimes even paid prostitutes.[16]: 21  In a letter to his friend Anthime he claims that such affairs continued even in his mature age and admits that he had two out-of-wedlock daughters (born in 1819 and 1836), both of whom died in infancy.[16]: 25  In their youthful correspondence Arthur and Anthime were somewhat boastful and competitive about their sexual exploits—but Schopenhauer seemed aware that women usually did not find him very charming or physically attractive, and his desires often remained unfulfilled. 

He left Weimar to become a student at the University of Göttingen in 1809. There are no written reasons about why Schopenhauer chose that university instead of the then more famous University of Jena, but Göttingen was known as more modern and scientifically oriented, with less attention given to theology.[16]: 140  Law or medicine were usual choices for young men of Schopenhauer's status who also needed career and income; he chose medicine due to his scientific interests. Among his notable professors were Bernhard Friedrich Thibaut, Arnold Hermann Ludwig Heeren, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, Friedrich Stromeyer, Heinrich Adolf Schrader, Johann Tobias Mayer and Konrad Johann Martin Langenbeck.[16]: 141–144  He studied metaphysics, psychology and logic under Gottlob Ernst Schulze, the author of Aenesidemus, who made a strong impression and advised him to concentrate on Plato and Immanuel Kant.[16]: 144  He decided to switch from medicine to philosophy around 1810–11 and he left Göttingen, which did not have a strong philosophy program: besides Schulze, the only other philosophy professor was Friedrich Bouterwek, whom Schopenhauer disliked.[16]: 150  He did not regret his medicinal and scientific studies; he claimed that they were necessary for a philosopher, and even in Berlin he attended more lectures in sciences than in philosophy.[16]: 170  During his days at Göttingen, he spent considerable time studying, but also continued his flute playing and social life. His friends included Friedrich Gotthilf Osann, Karl Witte, Christian Charles Josias von Bunsen, and William Backhouse Astor Sr.[16]: 151 

He arrived at the newly founded University of Berlin for the winter semester of 1811–12. At the same time, his mother had just begun her literary career; she published her first book in 1810, a biography of her friend Karl Ludwig Fernow, which was a critical success. Arthur attended lectures by the prominent post-Kantian philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte, but quickly found many points of disagreement with his Wissenschaftslehre; he also found Fichte's lectures tedious and hard to understand.[16]: 159  He later mentioned Fichte only in critical, negative terms[16]: 159 —seeing his philosophy as a lower-quality version of Kant's and considering it useful only because Fichte's poor arguments unintentionally highlighted some failings of Kantianism.[16]: 165–169  He also attended the lectures of the famous Protestant theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher, whom he also quickly came to dislike.[16]: 174  His notes and comments on Schleiermacher's lectures show that Schopenhauer was becoming very critical of religion and moving towards atheism.[16]: 175  He learned by self-directed reading; besides Plato, Kant and Fichte he also read the works of Schelling, Fries, Jacobi, Bacon, Locke, and much current scientific literature.[16]: 170  He attended philological courses by August Böckh and Friedrich August Wolf and continued his naturalistic interests with courses by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Paul Erman, Johann Elert Bode, Ernst Gottfried Fischer, Johann Horkel, Friedrich Christian Rosenthal and Hinrich Lichtenstein (Lichtenstein was also a friend whom he met at one of his mother's parties in Weimar).[16]: 171–174 
Early work

Schopenhauer left Berlin in a rush in 1813, fearing that the city could be attacked and that he could be pressed into military service as Prussia had just joined the war against France.[16]: 179  He returned to Weimar but left after less than a month, disgusted by the fact that his mother was now living with her supposed lover, Georg Friedrich Konrad Ludwig Müller von Gerstenbergk [de] (1778–1838), a civil servant twelve years younger than her; he considered the relationship an act of infidelity to his father's memory.[16]: 188  He settled for a while in Rudolstadt, hoping that no army would pass through the small town. He spent his time in solitude, hiking in the mountains and the Thuringian Forest and writing his dissertation, On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason.

Schopenhauer completed his dissertation at about the same time as the French army was defeated at the Battle of Leipzig. He became irritated by the arrival of soldiers in the town and accepted his mother's invitation to visit her in Weimar. She tried to convince him that her relationship with Gerstenbergk was platonic and that she had no intention of remarrying.[16]: 230  But Schopenhauer remained suspicious and often came in conflict with Gerstenbergk because he considered him untalented, pretentious, and nationalistic.[16]: 231  His mother had just published her second book, Reminiscences of a Journey in the Years 1803, 1804, and 1805, a description of their family tour of Europe, which quickly became a hit. She found his dissertation incomprehensible and said it was unlikely that anyone would ever buy a copy. In a fit of temper Arthur told her that people would read his work long after the "rubbish" she wrote was totally forgotten.[21][22] In fact, although they considered her novels of dubious quality, the Brockhaus publishing firm held her in high esteem because they consistently sold well. Hans Brockhaus (1888–1965) later claimed that his predecessors "saw nothing in this manuscript, but wanted to please one of our best-selling authors by publishing her son's work. We published more and more of her son Arthur's work and today nobody remembers Johanna, but her son's works are in steady demand and contribute to Brockhaus' reputation."[23] He kept large portraits of the pair in his office in Leipzig for the edification of his new editors.[23]

Also contrary to his mother's prediction, Schopenhauer's dissertation made an impression on Goethe, to whom he sent it as a gift.[16]: 241  Although it is doubtful that Goethe agreed with Schopenhauer's philosophical positions, he was impressed by his intellect and extensive scientific education.[16]: 243  Their subsequent meetings and correspondence were a great honor to a young philosopher, who was finally acknowledged by his intellectual hero. They mostly discussed Goethe's newly published (and somewhat lukewarmly received) work on color theory. Schopenhauer soon started writing his own treatise on the subject, On Vision and Colors, which in many points differed from his teacher's. Although they remained polite towards each other, their growing theoretical disagreements—and especially Schopenhauer's extreme self-confidence and tactless criticisms—soon made Goethe become distant again and after 1816 their correspondence became less frequent.[16]: 247–265  Schopenhauer later admitted that he was greatly hurt by this rejection, but he continued to praise Goethe, and considered his color theory a great introduction to his own.[16]: 252,256,265 

Another important experience during his stay in Weimar was his acquaintance with Friedrich Majer[24]—a historian of religion, orientalist and disciple of Herder—who introduced him to Eastern philosophy[25][16]: 266  (see also Indology). Schopenhauer was immediately impressed by the Upanishads (he called them "the production of the highest human wisdom", and believed that they contained superhuman concepts) and the Buddha,[25] and put them on a par with Plato and Kant.[16]: 268,272  He continued his studies by reading the Bhagavad Gita, an amateurish German journal Asiatisches Magazin, and Asiatick Researches by the Asiatic Society.[16]: 267,272  Schopenhauer held a profound respect for Indian philosophy;[26] although he loved Hindu texts, he never revered a Buddhist text but regarded Buddhism as the most distinguished religion.[27][16]: 272  His studies on Hindu and Buddhist texts were constrained by the lack of adequate literature,[28] and the latter were mostly restricted to Theravada Buddhism. He also claimed that he formulated most of his ideas independently,[25] and only later realized the similarities with Buddhism.[16]: 274–276 

Schopenhauer read the Latin translation and praised the Upanishads in his main work, The World as Will and Representation (1819), as well as in his Parerga and Paralipomena (1851), and commented

    In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my death.[29]

Schopenhauer in 1815. Portrait by Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl.

As the relationship with his mother fell to a new low, in May 1814 he left Weimar and moved to Dresden.[16]: 265  He continued his philosophical studies, enjoyed the cultural life, socialized with intellectuals and engaged in sexual affairs.[16]: 284  His friends in Dresden were Johann Gottlob von Quandt, Friedrich Laun, Karl Christian Friedrich Krause and Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl, a young painter who made a romanticized portrait of him in which he improved some of Schopenhauer's unattractive physical features.[16]: 278,283  His criticisms of local artists occasionally caused public quarrels when he ran into them in public.[16]: 282  Schopenhauer's main occupation during his stay in Dresden was his seminal philosophical work, The World as Will and Representation, which he started writing in 1814 and finished in 1818.[30] He was recommended to the publisher Friedrich Arnold Brockhaus by Baron Ferdinand von Biedenfeld, an acquaintance of his mother.[16]: 285  Although Brockhaus accepted his manuscript, Schopenhauer made a poor impression because of his quarrelsome and fussy attitude, as well as very poor sales of the book after it was published in December 1818.
